On January 1  1533  Michael Angelo then fifty-seven years old writes
from Florence to Tommaso de' Cavalieri a youth of noble Roman family
who afterwards became his favourite pupil: "If I do not possess the
art of navigating the sea of your potent genius that genius will
nevertheless excuse me and neither despise my inequality nor demand
of me that which I have it not in me to give; since that which stands
alone in everything can in nothing find its counterpart Wherefore your
lordship _the only light in our age vouchsafed to this worlds_ having
no equal or peer cannot find satisfaction in the work of any other
hand If therefore this or that in the works which I hope and promise
to execute should happen to please you I should call that work not
good but fortunate And if I should ever feel assured that--as has
been reported to me--I have given your lordship satisfaction in one
thing or another I will make a gift to you of my present and of all
that the future may bring me; and it will be a great pain to me to be
unable to recall the past in order to serve you so much the longer
instead of having only the future which cannot be long since I am all
too old There is nothing more left for me to say Read my heart and
not my letter for my pen cannot approach the expression of my good
will"[ 3 ]

Cavalieri writes to Michael Angelo that he regards himself as born
anew since he has come to know the Master; who replies "I for my part
should regard myself as not born born dead or deserted by heaven and
earth if your letters had not brought me the persuasion that your
lordship accepts with favour certain of my works" And in a letter of
the following summer to Sebastian del Piombo he sends a greeting to
Messer Tommaso with the words: "I believe _I should instantly fall
down dead_ if he were no longer in my thoughts"[ 4 ]

Michael Angelo plays upon his friend's surname as Shakespeare plays
upon his friend's Christian name These are the last lines of the
thirty-first sonnet:--

   "Se vint' e pres' i' debb' esser beato
    Meraviglia non e se nud' e solo
    Resto prigion d'un _Cavalier_ armato"

    "If only chains and bands can make me blest
     No marvel if alone and bare I go
     An armed knight's captive and slave confessed"
    (_J A Symonds_)

In other sonnets the tone is no less passionate than Shakespeare's
--take for example the twenty-second:--

    "More tenderly perchance than is my due
     Your spirit sees into my heart where rise
     The flames of holy worship nor denies
     The grace reserved for those who humbly sue
     Oh blessed day when you at last are mine
     Let time stand still and let noon's chariot stay;
     Fixed be that moment on the dial of heaven
     That I may clasp and keep by grace divine--
     Clasp in these yearning arms and keep for aye
     My heart's loved lord to me desertless given"[ 5 ]
                                    (_J A Symonds_)

In comparison with Cavalieri Michael Angelo could with justice call
himself old Some critics on the other hand have seen in the fact
that Shakespeare was not really old at the time when the Sonnets were
written a proof of their conventional and unreal character But this
is to overlook the relativity of the term As compared with a youth of
eighteen Shakespeare was in effect old with hi